you're kind of taking on board Papa's
idea that
that
um ideas
doesn't matter where they come from
and what matters is what happens to them
so what happens to them in your picture
is that they are subjected to criteria
uh
specifically ideas that I would call
goals
um I think it makes more like I think
there are more kinds of critique that
are available to other sorts of ideas
um
uh like for instance
yeah if I'm evaluating a scientific
theory I guess I guess maybe I would I
could still reformulate that as criteria
um but I'm going to compare it to
different kinds of ideas depending on
the sort of idea that I'm thinking about
like like the the sort of idea of like
should I go to the gym today or should I
walk to the to the um
walk to the grocery store and get a
chocolate bar is it it has some
different considerations as to whether
or not I'm going to accept it even
tentatively
um then asking the question
um
like do I think there's a tree outside
or is it raining or what is the the
fundamental nature of physics
um
um so all those things you've mentioned
um none of them are are problems none of
them take the form of problems which uh
according to papa is where thinking
actually begins
so a problem is a conflict between ideas
yeah that that that's an aspect of
problems that I've mostly stressed uh
I'm not sure Papa would put it that way
he might want to say that
um
many problems are of the form of
conflicts between ideas but but many
aren't and he would say that even an
amoeba has problems but it doesn't have
any ideas
okay and uh still I I think I I think
the conflict between ideas idea is still
there even in those cases even in amoeba
in the the the problem is
um the implicit problem of of uh
surviving in a in a environment and the
the conflicting ideas are
basically the existing genome and the
mutant
and and until you have an existing
genome and a mutant
there's no evolution
there's there's there's no natural
selection yeah
um the the nothing can happen and
um the the
what's more uh well
nothing can happen until
the solution has already been guessed
so again it's important in um
evolutionary biology what's in common
with the amoeba and the person uh uh uh
who's going to uh go down the road to
fetch a Hamburg or whatever it was was
the the the the the thing it is that
that the
um
uh
the idea comes first
it's it's
um it doesn't it it doesn't
come from
wondering
what I should do
unless that's a problem to you and
unless the the what I should do is uh is
is a place in your mind where there are
conflicting ideas and that problem has
has come to the top of your uh uh of
your scheduling
ideas but but uh
normally when we when we go to get a
hamburger when we when we put one foot
in front of the other we're not
wondering where should I put my foot
where should I put my foot next we're
not doing anything like that we just
have an existing idea
and since there's no problem there's no
thinking
um
my guess so I'm not sure if this is a
tangent my guess is when you are
literally walking there is in fact a
bunch of little bits of conflict where
you have sense data although I I think
we may need to clarify what sense data
means I'm fine saying sense data are
ideas
um so although also Theory Laden yeah
Okay so
sorry go on like you put your foot down
and you have like a little bit of like
sense of being off balance or on balance
and uh there's a bunch of of low level
processes that manage this such that
something goes a little bit wrong and
you correct it there are things
happening in the human body like like
the immune system yeah which is also
reacting to things uh doing one thing
stabilizing itself doing another thing
uh changing levels of importance and so
on none of that is thinking none of that
is creating knowledge
um there are things that the brain does
also that aren't thinking
they are they are just automatism
uh so when when I I wonder what three
times five is what I'm actually doing is
just retrieving a memory and if I
accidentally
retrieve uh if there's some corruption
and you know this memory was formed by
rote learning somewhere sometime in my
childhood when something was messed up
in my brain and therefore uh I the only
thing I can think of when someone says
what seven times three uh I I think of
21. but but
um
and if I accidentally think 31 then it
might be that an error correction
process comes in and and but what it's
doing we can anthropomorphize it by
saying uh oh the 31 sounds a bit wrong
let's go back to try to retrieve our
memory and do some error correcting on
the memory and then let's get back to
21. that's all things that that happen
um
uh they happen in the brain but they are
not creative
they're they're not uh creative thought
and similarly uh there's lots of things
that an amoeba does most of the things
that the amoeba does aren't part of
evolution
I mean any of them can be part of
evolution but but it just mostly what an
amoeba does is enact its existing
theories which have within them
um algorithms
yeah okay so let me let me see if I can
summarize that
so so in human bodies and in systems in
the world there there are yeah let's
start with human bodies in human bodies
there are a bunch of systems that I
would say are epistemic
um although maybe that is too strong
like like the immune system in
particular does something that looks
like learning it will encounter some
stimulus and it will uh store
um yeah I guess you you wouldn't say it
creates knowledge per actually I'm not
sure if you would say it creates
knowledge it sounds like it definitely
doesn't
um
it's but it does do something like store
memories yes so does a single bit of
computer memory yeah okay okay it
doesn't learn
okay that seems right
um all right so so there there are many
processes that store knowledge in
various ways or or
reflect the state yeah so so you can you
can write an algorithm that will take in
some input and produce some output and
some of that output might be and now
store this in memory
um like in fact yes you know I have in
fact written algorithms that do that
um you might also think of like a
sunflower which is apparently responding
to the world like it it the face follows
the the Sun but again if you look at the
details of it there's like some specific
there's a specific process the the side
that's that's in the shade grows a
little bit faster and so it tends to
lean towards the Sun
that that that algorithm that the
sunflower has yeah that does contain
knowledge but whilst the sunflower
itself is doing is not generating any
knowledge so that knowledge was
generated over a million years by uh
natural select natural selection
is already there and no new knowledge
will be created until there's a problem
okay give me a moment to think about
that no new knowledge will be created
until there's a problem
and probably not even then but but it's
only when
all right you know when the combine
harvester comes
it it it it it may cause a problem in
some sense but but usually
um
it'll just result in death
but the the sunflowers knowledge arose
from those few cases
where death where some ancestor of the
sunflower survived death yeah
right so so I definitely don't think
that the sunflower is accumulating
knowledge
um I do think that it there is knowledge
embodied in its structure yes
right but humans only acquire knowledge
when they encounter a problem
um
uh I'm not what about just playing out
logic like I start with I start with a
set of premises and there there is
implicit in those premises a set of
conclusions
um
I might not start out knowing although
maybe you would disagree with that I
might start I might not start out
knowing the conclusions of some logical
premises but if I sit down and think and
write it out on a piece of paper I'm
like ah this like this mathematical
proof is actually kind of surprising to
me but it turns out this is the case I
knew I I had all of the
um
like all of the pieces all along to
derive that but I actually need to sit
down and derive it and at the end it
seems like I have new knowledge it's a
good example because I I also think that
isn't knowledge either but but it looks
looks much more like uh you know uh
simulacrum of knowledge that then uh
than an amoeba or or a sunflower so
um
what happens much more often in regard
to mathematical proofs is that somebody
can learn a proof of my heart can verify
each step according to rules of
inference yep and then doesn't
understand it at all yes I'm also
familiar with this phenomenon
so all this goes to show I think that
proving is not the same as understanding
and following an algorithm is not the
same as creating knowledge
okay so I agree that proving is not the
same as understanding and it seems like
the thing that you're saying is
in order to have understanding from a
proof there is also resolving problems
which yes does relate to like that does
reflect my experience of doing math uh
like I will sit down and
I sort of have a bunch of intuitions
that I'm working through I'm like uh
Sierra seems like this but okay but what
about with this thing and I sort of
pushed those two ideas together until
I'm like okay yeah all right and you're
that that's resolving a problem
um and knowledge is created there yes
and it involves a lot of conjecture
it involves a lot of false conjecture
sure
um so and that is not written in the
proof it it's it's not in the proof it's
uh you're guessing or you're really
guessing in the case of learning
existing knowledge you're guessing what
was the problem situation in the
author's mind
the the problem situation that he tried
to write down but but wrote down that
you can never write that down fully or
even you know partly fully you you write
down this basically a set of Clues
that that will help the next person
maybe to get there faster than you did
hopefully
I mean so far it's working civil is like
we don't all have to completely reinvent
calculus each time
uh
it seems like we're able to trade people
in calculus without them needing to do
what Newton did yeah well I like with
many things in in the educational system
learning calculus usually means learning
the algorithms yeah fair enough
um and and never understanding it and
and you know people people uh get to get
to University
and then they see that that the
understanding that they had of calculus
which was wrong and and the things that
they thought were sort of self-evident
were actually false and then they they
learn this kind of better set of things
for how to pass the University exams
then they become graduate students and
then they're like holy that was all
false
uh and and eventually you you realize
that calculus like all mathematical
ideas like all ideas are
um
they're not they're not
um they don't come from anywhere they
they are conjectured they they are they
are calculus for example
arises out of problems it arrives out of
uh problems like Newton had what on
Earth does it mean to have a velocity at
an instant
velocity means rate of change of
something rate of change of position
um rate of change means the difference
between one one position and another
position
so it inherently involves two different
positions
so how can the instantaneous velocity at
one position have a meaning
and he struggled with this idea
meanwhile leibniz was struggling with
the same idea in in uh across the
continent and they weren't trying to
find an algorithm
they were guessing yes and most of the
things they guessed were flat out wrong
in the sense that they didn't even solve
the problem that these people had
finally they found ideas that did solve
the problem but later generations of
mathematics and mathematicians were like
okay it worked but that doesn't mean it
was true
and you know what in the 19th century
people worked hard to try to construct
something that was true in the 19th
century
what they thought would clarify
everything you know and get rid of these
the possible mistakes is by by proving
everything and so they evolved better
and better matters of proof until in
1900 the great German mathematician
Hilbert David Hilbert
uh uh put out a challenge for
mathematicians to
demonstrate a method of proof where if
something passed the test of being
provable by that proof that it was true
and if it didn't then it was false
and uh girdle proved that that was
impossible there you can't do that yeah
so uh there we are there
in mathematics you can actually prove
that mathematical ideas don't come from
anywhere
I'm I'm not sure that I'd buy that in
full generality
you can't show that a turing machine
any given turing machine will halt
because you could have an algorithm
that's whether or not it halts and then
if it doesn't keeps going and then feed
that to itself
uh you can't show that it won't halt yes
excuse me
um
yes in general so therefore although
there's such a thing as valid programs
and invalid programs yep
um there is no program that can tell the
difference
okay which is a kin okay
because we
and that is akin to
there are true ideas and false ideas but
we can't distinguish between them there
is no there is no reliable process for
distinguishing between them what we can
do is find errors
uh which is sort of like noticing that
some particular machine halts yes on a
particular input yes yes
that's a good point having an
explanatory Theory
that a certain program won't hold for
example if the program is finding prime
numbers yes you can actually form a
theory of prime numbers which tells you
that that program won't hold but that
theory of prime numbers depends on the
theory of integers
which girdle proved cannot be proved
consistent so it's it's a conjecture
it seems like there are simpler cases
like you could you could posit a turning
machine that just you know its only
instruction is it takes whatever's in
the in the current register and moves
over one and then takes whatever's in
that register and whatever it is it
moves over one and I can look at that
I'm like I'm pretty sure that's not
going to Halt because of yes but the the
obvious the axioms that you use to prove
that okay
particular
you know a pretty straightforward
application of the axioms but trying to
prove the axioms is impossible
well yeah so the Axiom is uh for any
integer there is an integer one larger
than it
and uh the the a process that that
searches through the integers will not
find the last one
yes okay and those those are the axioms
that set up the uh arithmetic of the
integers and we think it's true we're
sure it's true it is true
but what we can't do is derive that it's
true from anywhere yes all right so um
just summarizing where we're at
uh there are
we have some ideas
um yeah so first of all uh
working out some computations is not the
same and does not necessarily lead to
getting some new ideas yes
at least
at least for human beings although
I'm just I mean it I have like some
footnote there of like would other is it
would it be different for other entities
understanding something is not the same
as deriving it
yes also incidentally we can't really
derive anything uh from from like the
root the very bottom because there's no
bottom that we can use yes uh somewhat
unfortunate maybe or at least
disappointing but you know humans are
figuring out how to deal it's the only
thing that makes life worthwhile yes uh
all right well it sounds like you don't
think that it's disappointing
um
it's hard for me to visualize the like
I'm not even sure exactly how like the
the world where there is a bottom might
be just very radically different from
our world
um
but okay uh we can't derive it we can't
drive anything from the bottom I think I
I do think that that's true
um for
a number of reasons which are maybe all
actually isomorphisms of the same reason
um
and so the thing that we're calling
knowledge in this context is conjecture
where we're starting from where we we
make some guess we um
uh okay so actually we make a bunch of
guesses and then we look at the the
guesses next to each other and we're
like well this we starting from
this one has logical contradiction uh
maybe not necessarily logical
contradiction we're born with guesses
like yes we don't like we don't make
them all we're we're born we have some
inborn
um ideas and they have inborn they they
have conflicts with each other so okay
we're born with problems okay can you
give me some examples so so I also think
that we are born with guesses uh but can
you give me some examples of the sort of
thing that you're thinking about yeah
Papa's one of Papa's examples is uh that
a baby is born with the expectation
that there will be abreast there and
what it will look like
yeah and
um and what it will look like
I'm not sure if that's encoded actually
but uh what it will feel like or
whatever I mean some stimuli make it
make it go towards that and do the right
thing and some make it go away from it
and do the do a different thing and
these this expectation is never
perfectly met
and the the baby has has also other
expectations and other knowledge
uh some of it inexplicity I mean all of
it inexplicit but some of it like not
directly encoded
um so uh immediately I want to ask what
you mean by it's not perfectly met
um the expectation is not perfectly met
that is that because there's like a very
we couldn't mathematically crisply
describe what the expectation is no it's
like um so if let's say I mean we don't
know how any of this works so you know I
have to just make up stuff about uh how
to make a baby we couldn't make a robot
that behaves like a baby
um
so one thing is that some of these uh
expectations are also desires desires
for certain Sensations
so when it's drinking milk
it
it is not satisfied with the state of
drinking milk
because the the that that whole process
involves being unsatisfied so that you
drink more
okay and then you come to a place where
drinking milk is actually unpleasant
because you're full so you're yeah when
you're full but but it's not exactly
when you're full because the
physiological mechanisms aren't perfect
either
they they are just a guess as the
evolution made
as to as to what would be best for
babies and that's not perfect either
it's it's a in fact it's a couple
together compromise
um because the
um uh sensory apparatus isn't good
enough to to detect the exact Criterion
of when the digestive system is you know
uh so so anyway at the end you have a
conflict as well so the baby decides
whether to
uh how to cope with the problem of the
pleasure of getting more milk with the
discomfort of being full
and at some point
um I think sooner rather than later
um with with uh with something like a
dog
they they have similar uh ideas for for
newborn Behavior
and they have also an inborn Criterion
for choosing between them so if you get
if you get uh you know a hundred
different puppies and put them in
exactly the same
um situation they will start and stop
drinking at exactly the same moment
okay at the same moment you know you
will be able to see what how what the
difference was in the environment that
triggered the the one response rather
than the other and that's why there is
such a there is such a thing as a book
on Canine newborn Behavior
okay and you're claiming you're claiming
this is not the case for human infants
for humans it's already I'm guessing
it's already not true for babies you
know I haven't I haven't got strong
evidence either way but I would like
certainly it's possible that there's
also an inborn Criterion for this
specific thing there might be of whether
balancing the pleasure of eating and the
and the the discomfort being full yes
but um the the thing is that that babies
uh at some point very early on they do
things like learn the meanings of words
and there we know that
um there can't be an inborn Criterion
because uh well at least it's very hard
to imagine that there's an inborn
Criterion because everybody learns
different meanings for all the words and
for the grammar
and so no two people grow up learning
the same language what is the problem
that is solved by learning language
um oh well the the
uh a baby
um learns to improve its environment by
understanding and speaking
so before it can understand and speak uh
it can't say that it has a stomachache
um it can only scream but it would
scream in for many other reasons as well
and and people have to guess what the
reason is once it can speak it can form
a theory by the way note that it doesn't
know that it has a stomachache it
guesses that it has one
uh but it can form a guess and it can
correct errors in that guess
um and it doesn't know in the sense that
none of us really know anything
I'm saying that there isn't a
deterministic
connection
between various states of nerves in the
digestive system and various states of
preference in the brain
um
again there's only a loose connection
which is
initially formed by evolution
uh but it's crude it's very crude
there's things like referred pain you
can have pain which is actually
uh caused by one part of the body that
appears as a pain in the different part
of the body just because the sensory
system is is not it's just a crude
lashed up system
uh
all right I think I think there's maybe
two things there I could be maybe
hearing you to say at least one of two
things
um so I was surprised to say here you
say that it wasn't deterministic it
seems like
seems like ultimately all of this has to
be able to be described in terms of the
interactions of particle fields which
are deterministic yes taking many worlds
for granted no that you can have a
perfectly true theory of particles
and it will tell you nothing about the
behavior of babies
um
well it seems like if I have if I have a
detailed enough model of both babies and
a theory of particles I will get
something about the the behavior baby in
order to do that you would have to have
a model of the knowledge creation
process in a baby
which would be a baby it would be a
person that is sufficient
so definitely so it may even be
necessary and so that baby ah okay hold
on hold on let me let me say that
because part of the thing that a baby is
doing is creating knowledge in order to
predict what knowledge it will create it
will you need
a process that itself creates that
knowledge and therefore your your
computer simulation for predicting the
baby is itself a baby yes and can't be
predicted
and can't be predicted why why is that
it seems like suppose I took all the
particles in a baby uh well you know we
may have some problems with that we take
all the particles of a baby we measure
where they are and where they're going
there's where our problems are
um and uh so at this point you still
don't know right you you have to you you
still can't predict what the baby will
do you have to put it in put all those
items their positions and everything
into a computer around the program yes
that runs physics forward still don't
know until you get to the point that you
were wondering about you know why is it
doing this and not that
um yep that's right so you've got a baby
there
and you can't predict what it will do
until it does it
um
in your program
uh oh okay I see I see but but I it's uh
I can't predict in my program what it
will do before it does it
um but I could run the program like if I
take too literal to the to the the
particle level clones of two babies and
I run one of them forward in the same
conditions and then see what happens at
time Step n then I can also predict that
at time Step n for the other baby the
same thing will happen is that right as
you've set up a situation where
predicting some some baby is
retrodicting another one
yes yes that's exactly right that is
that is what I'm trying to do so you've
so basically
you you cannot predict the growth of
knowledge because because
um the only like certain types of
knowledge because the
um
process that predicted it
would be the process that you're trying
to predict
and it's only after so the the baby you
know call it Fred Fred is normally
instantiated as a bunch of
um proteins and and uh carbohydrates and
stuff but you could also instantiate
that person in a computer program
it's also Fred
there is no way in which that's not Fred
that they are both Fred
um although I might give I might like
say Fred one and Fred two just to like
keep if Fred one and Fred two behave the
same which we're we are assuming then
they are the same person
yeah I'm on board but they're the same
person and you okay and you're like well
you can't predict what Fred does like in
general you can't predict what Fred does
because in order to do that you need to
just watch what Fred does yes and then
you can retrodict it
right
uh all right
so there's there's something different
about knowledge creation from other
physical processes
and here is where there is a weakness if
you want to find a weakness in in my old
position about this okay can you ask
what is that thing that's different
what's the thing that makes Creative
Computer programs different from
non-creative ones I don't know
um all right
problems of of our age
hold on um is there a reason so this is
also not the it okay
it's so so the reason why it is not the
case so I can look at a a bit of python
code and be like and work through the
logic and predict what the python code
will output without running the python
code itself
um and this is running it in your brain
um
uh yeah unless you found an explanation
of what it's doing then you might be
able to predict
what it's going to do without running it
yeah so I there are I can either sort of
work through the code step by step and
be like and now it you know this
variable goes up the for Loop and goes
down again and I sort of keep keeping
count maybe on paper and that that's
just running the algorithm in my head
yes
I could also do something which is more
like
a mathematical proof and being like well
if I'm starting with these conditions
I'd know that the output can't be
outside of these bounds
and
uh that that's a diff that is a kind of
prediction of an algorithm
um which is possible for my Python
program at least in some context
um but is not possible for Fred because
um
because base because like there's no way
to to prove what Fred is going to do
short of simulating actual Fred yes that
is my guess
I mean I do expect particularly in the
in the long future uh when we have a we
are much better at just instantiating
agis
when we want to be
this thing where I can predict and and I
can predict some instantiation of an
agent by retroducting what another
instantiation of an agent did is pretty
practically relevant uh it means that
it is it is in in practice I can have a
deterministic model uh
actually that's not quite right given
some conditions or some inputs I can
have a deterministic model of how a a
individual develops Through Time
um
and that may become relevant as this
discussion progresses
but as it stands all right so so it is
both the case that human beings are um
deterministic they're defined by the
laws of physics at least as best we can
tell Beats
um
not even sure exactly what it would mean
if they were not
um
but also
you can't predict what a human does
without
just having the human do the thing yes
at least in full generality like
sometimes I will like you know
I I if I I'm
gonna like poke a person with a needle I
predict that they're gonna make a sound
uh
and this is not it depends yes but but
as I said uh many of the things that
humans do are not knowledge creation
so so long as a human is doing something
that isn't knowledge creation they're
much more predictable
right okay because human humans are
animal mechanisms and also have some
knowledge creation machinery
yes um Let me let me think of if there
is a counter example of
predicting knowledge creation
so so I'm so one thing that I might do
is I'm like well Moore's law has held
pretty well I'm predicting that we will
somehow I'm not sure exactly how of
course because if I did then I would
make a lot of money probably
um I predict that somehow we will figure
out how to get you know even fewer
transistors onto these chips uh I'm like
pretty confident in in that prediction I
mean I have been paying that much
attention I hear that Moore's Law may be
failing lately but um
that's a kind of predicting the growth
of knowledge
although it's in vague terms I'm not
saying specifically what knowledge we'll
create I'm saying we're gonna create
knowledge which allows us to do
something in this category
yes so you you there are aspects of the
situation that that uh that you can
guess will not be affected by the growth
of knowledge uh you you uh like for
example
um
you know that the the bits will not be
stored in in something smaller than
Atomic nucleus so something has to give
by the time we get there
also you know that the way that progress
has been going
basically
uh it has been an implementation of the
same idea
in higher and higher resolution
so the the idea has been
um uh
an array of bits of memory that the
memory is divided into bits they are
addressed in certain ways that there's a
microprocessor which has has certain
Elementary operations which we know as a
matter of logic
how how what they are and how they would
fit together so the problem of
making
the same more transistors on the same
chip or smaller transistors
um is is a problem of just implementing
things smaller so you could guess that
originally when they used uh
Optical uh uh what's it called anyway
the optical systems to photographically
change uh something which then uh
allowed acids to etch into the Silicon
or however they did it originally okay
and later you you could predict that
well you could get a higher resolution
if you use ultraviolet light instead of
uh the visible light and that that will
and then you can guess what it would
take are there any fundamental reasons
for for and so on so
to the extent that
it's a purely well I want to say a
purely engineering problem but that's
that's to denigrate Engineers I mean
they they have to be creative as well
they got a lot of problems yeah but they
right but they the problems they they
are solving is how to do it yes rather
than than what to do so you can guess
that that's not such a big deal
but as opposed to for instance inventing
the computer in the first place yeah if
you're forecasting the future and you're
like if you don't account for we'll have
artificial computers that's like a big
difference even the
um
even the scaling down thing
didn't go smoothly there were various
places where there were hold ups there's
a hold up right now I believe
uh that none of the big companies are
managing to uh get the bugs out of uh
whatever the latest thing is called huh
okay so you know uh Muslim has sort of
got a bit of a glitch if you look
microscopically predicting Moore's Law
is not a case of
uh predicting growth of knowledge
at least in the sense that you mean it
here yes I mean like there is there is
an important sense in which we're
predicting
something that I might call the growth
of knowledge but uh
there there's also an important
distinction so the big picture this is
pointing towards yeah is
whether we can say what
what we can say and whether we can say
certain things about the behaviors of
um knowledge creating systems uh whose
design we don't know yet
um yes that seems right I mean I think
we can know
some things about them but yes that is
that is where we're going at least I
hope so
okay so so
um
babies have some inborn ideas
and
those ideas that have some informed
ideas that are in Conflict humans start
out with some ideas in Conflict well
that may be a misleading with the thing
we have some ideas which come into
conflict as as they are executed they
come into conflict
um I'm not sure that static ideas can be
in Conflict yeah okay
fair enough
um
and also I I'm not sure if this is
relevant but you're claiming that that
doesn't happen for other animals
um yes
yes they do have ideas but their ideas
don't come into conflict in their
execution they there's there's a
if if there are two of them in Conflict
two fixed ideas that uh that are
we would say uh naively are in Conflict
then there's there's also a fixed idea
for resolving the disputes so they
aren't really in conflict
um all right I think this is a little
bit of a tangent but I have sometimes
seen a dog which is told to stay and
also it really really wants to get up
and it's like very obvious from watching
the dog that it really really wants to
get up yeah and I would definitely
suggest that this is there's a conflict
happening there uh yes it's I'm not sure
how I would assess whether or not
there's an inborn Criterion uh
well you can't just from that
description though note that when a
human is very inclined to disobey a
thing that he also has a strong reason
for obeying it often results in him not
looking like that at all
ah because he's biding his time waiting
for his moment
yeah it does it there's a way that for a
human it can be much more integrated
than the dog that she really wants to
yeah but but a human can can choose
to react
in any way
it can can choose to react just like the
dog if he wants to or like a cat okay
whereas a dog can't choose to react like
anything except a dog
um
I
think something I think that is probably
true although like I'm not I don't I
don't think that dogs pretend to be
other animals ever uh although if they
did that would
that would change your mind here you
know I'm sure there are animals that
pretend to be other animals but that's
okay say so
uh yeah those animals can't stop
pretending to be other animals if the
conditions are right
We Can't Stop is sort of interesting
because it seems like humans also can't
stop if the conditions are right because
like for any given human behavior it's
like from the laws of physics
perspective it is deterministic uh given
some inputs that's going to produce some
output we can't choose not to do what we
choose yes
for a a moth pretending to be a frog
um the fact that it can't stop doing
that is a a limitation on what it can do
a moth pretending to be a frog
oh oh I see I see I see oh yes many
animals many animals are uh
mimicking other animals large eyes on
their wings right right okay
right okay a moth pretending to be a
frog
cannot stop it that's that is just
embedded in its structure
um yeah
I'm a little bit suspicious of this
concept of choice I sort of expect that
choice is a hand wavy term that we use
to describe the
behavior of systems that are too
complicated for us to predict well okay
here's the thing
um
uh the reason why it's vague
is that it involves creativity and we
don't understand creativity
however
that it exists
um is is the conclusion of I think
inescapable arguments like the ones that
I've just said about predicting the baby
you know that that the growth of
knowledge for example is unpredictable
we know that about it even though we
don't know anything about how it works
I mean sorry we do know something that's
the thing yeah we're not in fact we know
quite a lot if you take if you think
that
Papa's epistemology is in part a theory
of creativity
then we do know something about it but
we don't know enough to program it and
that that's that's the you know that's
the important uh we don't yeah we don't
know enough to program it yet it is
unclear to me exactly how far away we
are from that ah
yeah to me too like like I I said in
that article you know we might be just
one idea away yeah
uh or we might be 500 years away
uh yes and
yeah sometimes people are like we have
no idea how to build an AGI and I'm like
um I think if so for one thing it's you
it's no individual human can assert what
all the humans know there might be some
human right now who's putting the
finishing touches on it as we speak
um that will happen
uh I just my best guess is it won't be
an individual human it will probably be
a large group of humans that have been
working really hard with a lot of money
but you know it could be you know a guy
in his garage who had some clever idea
and then coded it up and then there's a
person in there no that that
um
the question of what is life
um was the plagued uh philosophers and
scientists for for millennia
and then one person or actually two
people
uh Darwin and Wallace discovered it
and uh meanwhile there were hundreds or
thousands of biologists in the world
uh going down a completely hopeless path
of of uh cataloging insects and putting
them into groups and and so on and and
that didn't lead to the answer and and
uh just Darwin found the answer
basically sitting in his armchair they I
mean he also went out and looked at
something it's told as a story about
going out on HMS Beagle and and finding
birds and and so on but he found nothing
out there that he didn't already know
when he was sitting in his armchair
the the key thing that made him
different from all the other people that
were cataloging Birds was this idea that
these ideas that were already beginning
in his armchair and which he then
when he went out and looked at different
kinds of uh of uh what was it uh finches
finches uh yeah he knew what he was
looking for
uh and and everyone else who had
cataloged thousands of different species
of things they were looking for
something else and they didn't find it
I certainly think this sort of thing
happens at least sometimes where there
are lone
uh people who have very who are doing
something different than what the whole
field is doing yes often make progress
where the whole field is missing it
um then there's a question of when what
sorts of fields does that happen in
um
although uh doesn't seem that crucial to
me right now I I agree that it is it is
possible that the first AGI may be built
by some guy in his garage
um yes
okay I guess I want to talk about
creativity so creativity is here's my
understanding of where where what
creativity is right so so you got a
bunch of ideas and
um
use you sort of execute the ideas and
they they conflict with each other and
then when they conflict
there's a problem and I guess some part
of your mind identifies that there's a
problem or I'm not sure exactly how that
process works but uh that's an essential
thing the the mere fact that they're
conflicting if you don't notice it uh
doesn't constitute a problem in the
psychological sense
um
right uh
thinking is always the result of is
always the result of a problem what am I
getting from this one one thing that is
new that I sort of need to reformulate
around is
problems are Central
um and we start from problems
um okay so so
we have ideas the ideas have some
conflict that produces a problem yes we
identify that there's a problem via some
mechanism
um
and we may be mistaken about that too
sure sometimes we're mistaken that
there's a problem
um well I might say that if your mistake
if you mistakenly identify there's a
problem there is a problem Oh yes yes
but it's not between the theories you
thought it was between yeah right
yeah that happens you know that's not a
that's not just a theoretical point that
happens yeah
um and then
so then you have a problem and then
magically creativity generates a
conjecture
and the conjecture is like maybe maybe
the whole situation works like this does
that resolve this conflict between ideas
yes um and you
and the the process of being a human is
just doing that over and over and over a
million times a day uh
and at various scales yes
and there's a posit here which is we
don't know anything or almost nothing
about the process that generates the
conjectures
I think most of what we know is negative
we know how it doesn't work
we know certain things about you know
how it can't possibly work and and
popper is a sort of um
uh
uh apotheosis of of understanding why
lots of Common Sense ideas about how it
must work can't be true okay
so so that that is I think this is maybe
a tangent to this whole discussion but
that is interesting to me because my
current best guess
although the way the way we're using
words is is maybe excuse somewhat so so
it may turn out that when I say this it
actually relates to something different
in your ontology
um but my current best guess is that
conjunction conjectures are basically
inductive and that you generate
conjectures via
extrapolating out from what in along
various Dimensions from what things
you've seen or reasoned about before uh
and I think that there's some reason why
that can't be the case
yes extrapolation implies
um
uh similarity
and similarity implies a theory of what
is what counts as similar and what
counts as different
and therefore the content of the
extrapolation is in and that theory can
be false and can't be discovered by
extrapolation
so that's why uh okay so I was with you
until and that theory can't be
discovered by extrapolation
um yes so some somebody you know some
some somebody down the street here might
say that that uh uh he doesn't like
black people because black people commit
crimes and then uh I I could say that
that's that's the wrong way of thinking
about it it's it's actually poor people
who commit crimes I mean I don't believe
either those theories but I'm just using
it as a very simple example all right
now
uh he thought he was inducing his theory
because to him he saw black people black
person commits crime black person
commits another crime another black
person commits a crime and so on and to
him you know he he was thinking that
that uh he had induced this Theory or as
a different person sees the same data
and he sees poor people committing crime
poor person committing crime and so on
he thinks he can use that
both of them have actually just been
interpreting the data in the light of
their pre-existing Theory yeah and have
pretended to themselves I mean they
don't know that they're doing this but
they have reinterpreted the thought
process in their own mind as one of
extrapolating a theory from the data
actually what they have been doing is
interpreting the data in the light of a
theory
and the theory came first
um
yeah actually what they're doing is
interpreting the data in light of a
theory
is there a reason why so okay so so the
conjecture generation process
couldn't that be doing it seems to me
that that could be doing something like
interpreting data in light of a theory
I'm not saying that it's not
theory-latent there is there is Theory
like background knowledge or whatever
when one does that one isn't creating
knowledge
one one may subjectively feel as though
one is
as I said because one mistakes the the
uh the process is being one of getting
the theory from the data but what one is
actually do what we do all the time we
have a theory you're just making a guess
though it's just a conjecture you still
there's still like many layers of uh
criticism I mean everything is a
conjecture but it in the case where for
example the person has only that one
theory about this particular issue
although it's a guess it's not a guess
about this thing it's it's a guess that
he formed before and it's just applying
now because it's his only guess
so this guess arose at some point in his
past as a result of solving a problem
and but then if he solved it to his
satisfaction if it didn't conflict with
anything that he knows of then it became
part of him that wasn't controversial it
wasn't the subject of thinking
and then when it was used that use also
isn't thinking
uh I I do I do feel like we're drawing
some tight lines around thinking here
which I'm not sure if I would on
reflection endorse native thinking I I'm
you know I'm using whatever shorthand is
okay
useful but but uh like I said
at some point in my past I I got
the value of three times seven uh
indelibly imprinted on my brain and uh
now whenever I want to know what three
times seven is yeah okay but but that's
not new thinking that's that's an
automatic process that is yes of recall
that always I mean when we have a theory
that's uncontroversial
we can apply it without thinking
yeah that's what you've referred a while
ago to compiling ideas when we compiling
ideas that that's that's that's a very
good uh way of putting it because
not only do we make it sort of automatic
and therefore its application is not as
it used to be
um part of a creative thought process
it's it's just a mechanical process but
we may also throw away some knowledge we
may forget some knowledge we we may
forget uh the variable names and the
subroutine structure and only retain the
machine code
that that happens when when you learn to
drive
yeah a beginner is just thinking all the
time about when should I change gear and
that kind of thing or as an experienced
driver not only does the thing but can't
I can't explain to you what he's just
done yeah
um
okay I guess I want to summarize here a
little bit
um
there uh when people talk about
extrapolating
they are making an error or or yeah
they're always making an error I'm not
sure that I I would need to think
further to see if I think that it's
always the case but that but uh your
claiming at least they're always making
error which is
um they are taking some categorization
schema and they are using that
categorization schema to interpret some
data that they have yeah it's not in no
way pure
um you you all you always start with
some categorization schema and if you're
like well conjectures
um
then you're sort of passing the buck and
you're like well where did you get to
that categorization scheme in the first
place that must have evolved from some
problem that you solved where this this
seemed like a good enough solution to
resolve that confidence would give a
different answer to the question where
he would say I may not remember exactly
but it must have been itself an
induction process so the the the
philosophers who in the 19th century who
were who were thinking about uh
induction they would say we have in our
minds a principle of induction where did
it come from we induced it
I definitely don't think that I think
that's stupid
um it's it's an infinite regress and it
isn't true uh yeah exactly people were
quite small
um yeah okay when I say that that's
stupid I am you know it's like when I
was reading Aristotle in high school and
you could tell you know yes the parts
where I disagreed that was just like the
margins would be filled up with many
essays about how Aristotle did not
understand economics but that's not
because I'm smarter than Aristotle I
just have the you know great advantage
of coming several thousand years later
after the invention of Economics which
I'd much appreciate
um
okay
I
so so we we there's sort of a question
it seems to me that there's sort of a
question I'm not sure how far we want to
follow this because I
I this this these are areas that I'm
less clear about myself and so I'm not
sure that I can make
coaching arguments but it seems to me
that in general in epistemologies you
have a problem of dealing with an
infinite regress that you if you're like
well if you're just trying to induce
things all the way down and you're like
well how do you know that you can rely
on induction well because of induction
you have a bit of a problem
um and also it seems to me in what I've
understood of paparian epistemology
there is a
a similar danger of an infinite regress
where you're like well
um we we generate a conjecture and then
we criticize it and you're like well
where did the conjecture come from and
you're like well there was an
unconscious process uh now correct me if
you don't believe any of this I don't
want to put words in your mouth well I I
I don't think that's an infinite regress
when you say where the conjectures come
from I mean we uh
we know where they come from it's just
that we don't know the implementation
details and that they turn out to be
crucial in this case uh but but they
they come at the at the lowest level of
implementation they must be random
uh
uh they must be random I mean not random
within particular probability
distribution function but they are not
they're random in in the sense that um
mutations are random
um that is it's not that every genetic
change is equally likely it's that what
we mean by random in that case is that
the changes are not
um uh are not caused by any particular
uh aspect of the problem of the
environment in the case of an animal
so it's it's not that the giraffe uh
stretches its neck uh to to get to high
uh hanging fruit or vegetable and uh it
it and then the mutations happen yeah
the mutations happen anyway whether it's
stretching or not that and they come
first and any any uh Improvement in the
giraffe's neck
comes before
the selection pressure applies applied
yeah so so that is absolutely
yeah so that so that is absolutely the
case in this in the case of natural
selection yes it is plausibly the case
in
human in the human generation of ideas
although it is I'm not sure that that's
the only way that it could work like the
thing the thing that I'm hearing you
suggest is that um when you're trying to
solve a conflict between ideas you start
with basically a random speed and then
you're like well I'm just gonna try
something random does that solve the
problem no how could I improve that
solution
um it makes all the difference that
where in the process this random
supposed random number happens
it it's not that you start with the
random seed it's that you start with
with say a very high level heuristic
which is which is then unsatisfactory in
some way and so you want to modify it
yeah okay by a heuristic modifying
heuristic and so on down to you know
right about by the time you're 11 stages
down then you have somewhere where you
don't have a heuristic so that there's
some process says well let's try the
first thing that comes to hand
it's not that it's a random number
generator it's right okay you're
starting you're starting with with
background knowledge but then you tweak
the background knowledge to see if that
works better and then you continue a
process of
of sort of tweaking and pruning tweaking
and pruning the high level the higher
level tweaks are dependent on the
problem
yes okay it's just when eventually after
11 level 11 you get down to a place
where you've exhausted all the
possibilities of extracting it from the
problem so you just take the first thing
that comes to hand
uh oh wait I didn't understand that
sentence uh you get down to so level 11.
is there a specific level 11 or you're
just like that no I mean I'm sure it's
not levels either it's because it's much
more
um opportunistic than that
um like at at the highest level you're
you're thinking
um
somebody says to you
do you know that there are actually
white criminals as well
okay and that and you say no your first
thought is no that can't be and then you
think well actually I have seen
newspaper reports okay
it's part of a conspiracy they're just
saying that all right so at this higher
level
the the nature of the problem
is has a large input in into the nature
of the conjectures to solve it
uh when you say a higher level you're
referring to
like at the level of human thoughts as
opposed to the level of the underlying
mechanisms that are generating the
thoughts their level of explicit
thoughts
of less explicit and so on and uh there
yeah and and then
um
if the problem isn't solved by the
application specific
um considerations
like it it
at the highest level you're looking you
know that you're looking for something
that contains
phrases like white people and black
people and crime and so on and then at
the next level down and and you you
quickly scan through sort of various
ones of those and see that that kind of
thing isn't going to solve your problem
um and then there's all of the solutions
that are all of the yeah all of the the
um conjectures that are made out of
those building blocks don't answer the
question or all the ones that you've
tried all the ones that seem promising
to you yep okay then with our various
strategies you say well let's generalize
the problem yeah okay I'm not I'm not
talking about all criminals you know so
you you can have a more General thing
that tries to hedge your theory and then
then if you're rational you'll think
well wait a minute am I using a hedging
process that would that would save any
Theory
and if it would save any Theory then
it's not rational to assume it and yeah
but you might not think that you might
like those theories you might settle on
a theory like Marxism that explains any
situation in terms of the same reason
and you might be satisfied with that for
a while you might be satisfied with that
for years or you might not yeah and uh
but what I was referring to happening at
level 11 is that
if the thing is still unsatisfactory
when you've tried everything every kind
of way of changing things in every kind
of way of changing the Criterion and all
that sort of right down to inexplicit
levels
then what will happen is that the the
process will just try something
um maybe people are actually ducks
maybe people are actually computers yeah
ah
that one is actually
on point
um okay
all right so so so my here's my story
humans going about in the world when
they go about in the world they have
ideas the when they execute the ideas
they are in conflict with each other
that causes a problem some mechanism in
a human mind recognizes there's a
problem and initiates a process maybe
the process is actually going on in the
background all the time but a process
either starts or continues of um
generating conjecture that attempts to
to uh resolve the conflict between ideas
that
conjecture process so first of all
um we don't really know how it works but
uh here's a conjecture about how the
conjecture process works
um
uh we we have a bunch of background so
yeah so now we're in the box of this is
the the conjecture generation procedure
um we have a bunch of background
knowledge and we will start by just
applying our background knowledge and
seeing if that solves our our conflict
and
you know we we tried that a bunch
um and then if that doesn't work that
doesn't resolve the con like sometimes
it does sometimes we're like ah you just
forgot about regression to the mean
right there it is yes
uh but if that doesn't work then you
might sit there and um sort of modify
your background ideas until you get a
version that you're then you're trying
the modified versions you're like well
uh maybe it's not exactly
um
yeah we're using example of uh racism uh
where we're like well okay maybe maybe
it's um
I have some idea that only
um black people commit crimes and then I
am like okay well maybe it's mostly
black people that commit crimes and I'm
like does that solve the yeah I'm sorry
I'm sort of tweaking it a little bit
um and then
I'm I'm continuing so so level one is I
just try my background ideas level two
is I am where again levels is sort of
like
the order in which we're doing things uh
maybe uh again we're all you're changing
your initial Theory yeah you're changing
it intentionally to meet you know to
meet this problem it's not a random
change yet
yeah you're thinking that this this kind
of thing might solve the problem right
so I do want to flag that in terms of
like in the project of Designing how an
AGI Works saying we're intentionally
doing it to solve this conflict sort of
leaves open like how exactly does that
work
um like I can't write code that's like
now come up with a solution that yes
it's like it matches this conflict
between ideas uh let me just say at this
point that that uh conjecture is only uh
step two instead of recognizing a
problem is step one conjecture is step
two then there's criticism
criticism yet but but at each point when
when you notice that tweaking the
problem to saying that maybe it's just
mostly black people
noticing that that is doesn't work is a
critical process yeah and the critical
process in general
is is is in general also creative
so you're creating usually you're not
using stock criticisms you're usually
creating a criticism sometimes it a
stock criticism will do like you said
you know it if you if you have if if you
have a list in your mind of your sort of
biases that you have then you say well
I'm doing this bias would do it well
this bias it so but but also in any kind
of non-trivial thought process
the critical phase is also conjectural
create creative and and when you say
it's conjectural you that means I'm I
have some conjecture which I'm putting
forward that maybe
resolves the conflict between ideas and
then there's another process which is
going to generate a conjecture for why
our first conjecture might not work yes
um and then
uh I guess we also need to critique our
critique right we're going to generate
like so you you can form the theory that
your critique has a flaw
or you cannot form that theory the the
number of possibilities increases
exponentially as you go along and and
what you actually choose is is only a
small proportion of those
and which ones you choose are determined
by heuristics of of how you choose those
things which are themselves theories
conjectures which can be changed
um I I didn't capture that last sentence
which are themselves conjectures which
can be changed yes so um your your
critiques are themselves conjectures
which can be changed
yes
uh so all of this gives sort of the
impression of a very busy mind there's
just like a bunch of pieces that are all
both like there's some conflict and
we're going to generate a conjecture and
we're generating a counter conjecture
that will maybe critique the conjecture
and and we ain't scratched the surface
yet yeah right
uh but just I was just pointing out that
this process I've described
um
it grows exponentially because at each
stage you've got the choice of whether
to
um
whether to reject the conjecture on the
basis of the criticism or reject the
criticism on the basis of the conjecture
or
form a new one of those two so there's
like four possibilities at each level so
at by the by the time you've got to 11
level 11
it's it's 4 to the power of 11.
and there's not room for the in that in
the whole brain
so you need a pruning
um system yes that pruning system is
itself
conjectural knowledge which is being
changed which is subject to change
okay
um so so on checking that uh you said
there were four cases you can accept the
the conjecture uh you can accept the the
criticism of the conjecture you can
modify the conjecture or you can modify
the criticism of the conjecture yeah you
can start trying to modify them yes but
by the same because yeah right
yeah we're actually we're calling our do
epistemology function we can we can sort
of double click and be like all right
now we're going to do the the
yes it's like chess is it for for a
human to play chess you've got to have
some drastic pruning mechanism yeah by
the way the way humans learn chess is
creative
so this this thing is not just an
analogy that is exactly how we learn to
play chess we learn to prune our pruning
algorithms and and so on okay where I'm
like maybe this is a good move so so it
seems like when I'm learning chess I'm
largely I had a conversation with Lily
about this on Twitter in fact I'm
largely learning from feedback where I I
conjecture maybe this is a good move and
then I get trounced by the person I'm
playing against and then I learn turns
out that was not a good move and in that
sense the the uh at least in that
situation
uh the criticism part is sort of coming
from
uh I guess okay it it has to turn into
an idea in order to operate in my mind
but uh the idea is well I lost that game
by a lot so something something didn't
work yeah so then you form a conjecture
and it's not just okay this was a wrong
move it's a conjecture of about
more more importantly I think more often
than that it's it's a question of
what was wrong with my way of choosing
that move
what what should I have noticed
and okay then you know at at deeper and
deeper levels you you build up what
chess players call an intuition yes you
uh which doesn't take the form of if
this happens then this happens then this
happens then this happens it takes the
form of this is a position like a good
attack yeah
without any specific thing and that
that is how we learn knowledge about
Chess
that's how
uh Grand Masters
could beat computer programs that
uh analyzed orders of magnitude more
cases than the Grand Master did yeah
because there's
compressed theories about what makes
good
yes there's genuine knowledge there
all right and you would say that the
chess program it's not General the chess
program the chess engine all it does is
um
uh
dry out implications no no no knowledge
creation is happening yes um although I
mean there's knowledge Creation in the
discovery of game freeze
uh like that what you need to do to
build the chess engine is yes definitely
yes
um although I don't know how familiar
you are with so so it seems to me that
Alf I would say that alphago does do
knowledge creation
um yes it may it if so it's evolutionary
knowledge creation it it's I mean it
doesn't know what it's doing it doesn't
know what it's doing yes yes
but it is doing the same thing of
playing out a game free and then
learning from that which sorts of moves
seem like good moves overall yeah well
uh biology does that too
um the the
uh you know at some point it changed
from using RNA to using DNA because DNA
is more robust
but it didn't know what it was doing
there wasn't there was there was no
instantiation of that explanation that I
just gave yeah in the process that it it
was just dumb Evolution yeah yeah
creating knowledge very slowly and Alpha
zero creates knowledge very very very
slowly
it's just in terms of the number of
games it plays yes
um
yeah so I I definitely I did
I once made a yeah there's something you
might call sample efficiency which is
how much go skill do you get per game of
Go that you play and at by this measure
Alpha zero is very very bad compared to
a human yes but Alpha zero makes up for
it by playing way more games than a
human has a chance to play in their
lifetime in terms of specifically
playing chess it does but um knowledge
that a uh Pro chess player has
enables all sorts of other things to
happen as well such as
explaining what he's doing
so yes a chess player can write a book
saying how to play attacking chess
and Alpha zero even though it attacks
better than he does can't write anything
like that that seems correct to me
whenever you have something that can
learn from uh apparently much fewer
cases it's because the programmer has
put in the knowledge that will restrict
it to those cases now now a little bit
of that happens whenever you get an
ordinary IA AI learning things
in that when a human learns those things
they are because they're learning
explanatory knowledge the knowledge has
reach and they have also learned
something about for example when they
learn chess they've also learned
something about uh games in general
about making certain kinds of decision
in general and not others
and uh the uh
that is because they
are not learning when they learn chess
they're not just learning how to win how
to win a chess
alphazeeras is learning how to win at
chess but it's not learning for example
how to make a beautiful game
now
um uh because of the way that chess
players learn chess
they learning these heuristics which are
connected with heuristics about beauty
and other things and so uh you often
hear
um chess players
saying that okay I won but it was boring
and the alpha zero never says that and
in fact
um well
I think it might be possible
and should be done should be tried to
make alpha zero not only
uh win games but report whether they
were boring or not
um and this is a much more difficult
problem but I think it's possibly within
the scope of dumb AI
um by the way I'm not convinced that
that that Alpha zero is like biological
evolution and that that's kind of the
most I can imagine it being but I I
would guess that it's dumber than
biological evolution
seems to me I I have I have heard it
said that you have said although I don't
want to put words in your mouth and
maybe you'll be like I would never say
something like that that um
you think that a super intelligence is
impossible
because
uh there's universality of explanations
or yeah Universe explanatory
universality
um
and and so there's sort of like two
categories of things there are things
that can generate explanatory knowledge
at all and there are things that cannot
generate explanatory knowledge at all
um
yeah so so first I want to see if that's
about right and then I have a response
to that right these things in question
being programs
um
yeah although also we can we can specify
pretty much we can think of anything as
a program right they're all but yes well
it's just that people say is there
something which is to humans as humans
are to ants
well I before answering that I have to
rephrase it in the form is there
something which is to the program
running in human brains as the
programming in human brains is to the
program running in antbrains okay yeah
I'm I'm
solid with that yeah you see that that
it's just conflating two different kinds
of difference one thing about nandbrain
is it only has a few K of of memory and
and uh processing space and uh humans
have have uh many gigabytes at least huh
there could be something that has many
exabytes
which is vastly more let's say and there
certainly could be a thing like that yep
and in fact there is a thing like that a
human plus the internet is that
um uh yeah although also there's an
important difference if it's in your
head versus accessible to you on the
internet
uh yeah if I could modify myself to have
exabytes of of memory I think I think I
would be like that would make me quite
different as a person than if you just
gave me access to the internet which is
also a really big Improvement I I don't
want to sound ungrateful for the
internet uh
I I
mean in a way you'd be a better person
like that when they invented writing
when they give a different person not
necessarily better
Well a different person you you
um
so I agree with Nick Bostrom that
in technological Improvement will enable
ways of being that we don't know about
now that we aren't conceiving now and
which are in fact better than now okay
great those those people would be better
than us in a certain sense
but I I but
that is not to say that the ideas they
have will be
some kind of different thing from our
ideas we we could have those ideas just
by plugging in some add-ons to our
brains
um yes I think so so I think I broadly
agree with that I don't think that super
intelligences will have some
fundamentally different sort of idea
than
humans and especially enhanced humans
would have there are some important
details about
how that enhancement can work that's I
would want to work through uh
it seems to me though that we were just
talking about a whole zoo of conjecture
processes and critique processes and
fractal conjecture critique processes
and pruning processes that are happening
in order to generate even a single
conjecture for
a given conflict between ideas in a
human mind
and as we say we don't know how all of
that works in detail
um
it seems to me like there is probably a
class of algorithms that do that that
basically do those functions and that if
you
uh and that's some of those algorithms
are better or worse than other
algorithms and therefore you could you
could write a mind which is much better
at doing epistemology at getting better
explanations faster at a mind that is
much worse at that based on the
algorithms that you're using to do all
of these different things we already
have that so uh
so the key concept is subroutines
we call subroutines and we know that
many of the subroutines that we
consciously call are executed
unconsciously yep it wouldn't make any
difference to us if they were executed
unconsciously in an add-on
it would feel exactly the same uh yeah
so I sort of want to hold off on talking
about add-ons for now although I do
agree that in principle
that that's a thing that we could that
humans humans could do that and it is
desirable that we do that but I would
start I want to start by just clarifying
that it is possible to have a thing
which is effectively much smarter than
modern humans because the algorithms
that it's running to do epistemology are
better in some ways than the algorithms
that humans run to use epistemology well
I still think you're kind of
uh having the wrong picture of of what
it takes to be better
um we we have you know I just said our
unconscious mind is an example of an
add-on
uh pencil and paper is another example
of an add-on
there's no
is
our
we're not a different person by getting
a
better add-on until we decide to improve
as a person
by by
learning to choose those unconscious
processes or processes in the add-on
rather than others
um
once there are AIS that are have
developed the knowledge to use vast
amounts of memory for thinking which uh
I think will not happen that fast by the
way I think that's not the
we are not memory limited or speed
limited uh I I we're in the the
bottleneck in human thinking is
overwhelmingly software
but okay that that's a different issue
perhaps uh but by the time AIS have that
humans will also have it that it's just
additional Hardware that humans could
also use
okay so so I want to flag there's a by
the time claim like like now now we're
not just talking about in principle what
things are possible but we're talking
about technological trajectories and
which ones will will reach fruition at
different points in time
um which is not fully a Crux for me but
is a big chunk of a Crux for me if I
thought if I thought that that um human
augmentation strong forms of human
augmentation was going to arrive before
AGI I would
I don't think this fully solves the
problems that I'm concerned about but it
does seem like
plausibly we're in a much better
situation with regards to these problems
thanks for meeting with me for well
thanks it's been really fun